Fail render when the Aura-2 GPU request is smaller than cudaVisibleDevices (#183)
deepgram/self-hosted-resources: charts/deepgram-self-hosted/CHANGELOG.md

## Unreleased

> ### Added

Reviewer: The last four PRs (#175, #177, #180, #182) each added a dated `## [x.y.z]` section and bumped `version` in `Chart.yaml`; `## Unreleased` has been an empty placeholder on main throughout. This PR adds its entries under `## Unreleased` and leaves `Chart.yaml` at `0.42.0`, so as it stands the change can't be published as a release.

`Chart.yaml` isn't in the diff so there's no line to attach to, but it needs `version: 0.42.1` alongside this. Adjust the date to the merge date.

```suggestion
## [0.42.1] - 2026-08-19

### Added
```

> - Added render-time validation for the Aura-2 GPU count. With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` enabled, an Engine pod sees only the GPUs the device plugin allocates to it, so a GPU request smaller than the number of devices listed in the active `aura2.*.cudaVisibleDevices` leaves Engine panicking at startup on a device that does not exist. That combination now fails `helm install`/`helm upgrade` with a message naming the values to change, resolving to the `engine.agentOverrides.agent-text-to-speech.resources` path in voice agent deployments and to `engine.resources` otherwise.

Reviewer: Describes the count-based, device-plugin-only check. Updated to match the behaviour in the suggestion above.

```suggestion
- Added render-time validation for the Aura-2 GPU configuration. An Aura-2 Engine needs 2 dedicated GPUs, so `helm install`/`helm upgrade` now fails when the effective GPU request for an Aura-2 Engine is below 2, when its request and limit differ, when the active `aura2.*.cudaVisibleDevices` lists fewer than two device indices or a non-integer value, or when `aura2.enabled` is true with no language block enabled. With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` enabled an Engine pod sees only the GPUs the device plugin allocates to it, re-indexed from 0, so the chart additionally fails when any listed index falls outside that range — previously that combination rendered without complaint and left Engine panicking at startup on a device that does not exist. Messages name the values to change, resolving to `engine.agentOverrides.agent-text-to-speech.resources` in voice agent deployments and to `engine.resources` otherwise.
```

> - Added render-time validation for the Aura-2 GPU count. With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` enabled, an Engine pod sees only the GPUs the device plugin allocates to it, so a GPU request smaller than the number of devices listed in the active `aura2.*.cudaVisibleDevices` leaves Engine panicking at startup on a device that does not exist. That combination now fails `helm install`/`helm upgrade` with a message naming the values to change, resolving to the `engine.agentOverrides.agent-text-to-speech.resources` path in voice agent deployments and to `engine.resources` otherwise.

Reviewer: Describes the count-based, device-plugin-only check. Updated to match the behavior in the suggestion above.

```suggestion
- Added render-time validation for the Aura-2 GPU configuration. An Aura-2 Engine needs 2 dedicated GPUs, so `helm install`/`helm upgrade` now fails when the effective GPU request for an Aura-2 Engine is below 2, when its request and limit differ, when the active `aura2.*.cudaVisibleDevices` lists fewer than two device indices or a non-integer value, or when `aura2.enabled` is true with no language block enabled. With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` enabled an Engine pod sees only the GPUs the device plugin allocates to it, re-indexed from 0, so the chart additionally fails when any listed index falls outside that range — previously that combination rendered without complaint and left Engine panicking at startup on a device that does not exist. Messages name the values to change, resolving to `engine.agentOverrides.agent-text-to-speech.resources` in voice agent deployments and to `engine.resources` otherwise.
```

### Changed

> - Documented that Aura and Aura-2 need exactly 2 GPUs per Engine: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone TTS release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.

Reviewer: Aura-1 needs 1 GPU. Also scoping "exactly" to a floor, since 3+ wastes a device but doesn't break.

```suggestion
- Documented that an Aura-2 Engine needs 2 dedicated GPUs: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two, so additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Flux TTS needs 1 dedicated GPU. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone Aura-2 release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.
```

> - Documented that Aura and Aura-2 need exactly 2 GPUs per Engine: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone TTS release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.

Reviewer: Aura-1 requires 1 GPU, and "exactly" overstates the upper bound. This also adds a breaking-change entry, since the request floor applies with the device plugin disabled; the wording follows the format already used at line 109.

```suggestion
- Documented that an Aura-2 Engine needs 2 dedicated GPUs: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two, so additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances rather than one larger Engine. Flux TTS needs 1 dedicated GPU. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone Aura-2 release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.
- **Breaking change for standalone Aura-2 deployments:** A release left at the default `engine.resources.requests.gpu: 1` now fails to render instead of deploying an Engine that under-declares its GPU usage. Set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2`.
```

> - Documented that Aura and Aura-2 need exactly 2 GPUs per Engine: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone TTS release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.

Reviewer: Aura-1 requires 1 GPU, and "exactly" overstates the upper bound. This also adds a breaking-change entry, since the request floor applies with the device plugin disabled; the wording follows the format already used at line 109.

```suggestion
- Documented that an Aura-2 Engine needs 2 dedicated GPUs: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two, so additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances rather than one larger Engine. Flux TTS needs 1 dedicated GPU. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone Aura-2 release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.
- **Breaking change for standalone Aura-2 deployments:** A release left at the default `engine.resources.requests.gpu: 1` now fails to render instead of deploying an Engine that under-declares its GPU usage. Set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2`.
```

> - Documented that Aura and Aura-2 need exactly 2 GPUs per Engine: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone TTS release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.

Reviewer: Same Aura-1 point as in `values.yaml`. Adding the Flux TTS count too, since #182 just landed it.

```suggestion
- Documented that an Aura-2 Engine needs exactly 2 GPUs: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Flux TTS needs 1 dedicated GPU. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone Aura-2 release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.
```

> - Documented that Aura and Aura-2 need exactly 2 GPUs per Engine: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone TTS release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.

Reviewer: Same Aura-1 point as in `values.yaml`. Adding the Flux TTS count too, since #182 just landed it.

```suggestion
- Documented that an Aura-2 Engine needs exactly 2 GPUs: a single larger GPU does not substitute for two, and one Engine will not schedule work across more than two. Additional GPUs on a machine serve additional Engine instances. Flux TTS needs 1 dedicated GPU. Because `engine.agentOverrides` applies only when `agent.enabled` is true, a standalone Aura-2 release must set `engine.resources.requests.gpu` and `engine.resources.limits.gpu` to `2` itself.
```

### Notes

> - With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` disabled (the default), the chart mounts every node GPU into every Engine pod, so a GPU request smaller than the `cudaVisibleDevices` device count still runs and is left as-is by the new validation. It does under-declare GPU usage to the scheduler, which can then place a second Engine on the same node and bind the same physical devices. Size the request to the devices the Engine actually uses, or enable the device plugin.

Reviewer: Under the suggested check this is no longer accurate: the request floor of 2 applies with the device plugin disabled as well, so a short request is not left as-is. Only the index-range check is scoped to the device plugin.

```suggestion
- With `engine.resources.useNvidiaDevicePlugin` disabled (the default), the chart mounts every node GPU into every Engine pod, so whether a `cudaVisibleDevices` index resolves depends on the node's physical GPU count, which the chart cannot see at render time; only the device-plugin path is validated for index range. The `"2,3"` defaults on `aura2.spanish`/`aura2.polyglot` therefore require a 4-GPU node in this mode. Sizing the GPU request below the devices an Engine actually uses also under-declares GPU usage to the scheduler, which can then place a second Engine on the same node to bind the same physical devices.
```
